 When you are practicing anapana, meditate change. You only just trying to observe the innate outbreak with mindfulness, keeping your mind around the nursery area. Then when your mindfulness becomes stronger, then you will be able to stay with this, and breathe, outbreath, outjease, comfortably and peacefully for a long time. You only just trying to observe the innate outbreak with mindfulness. When you are observing the innate outbreak with mindfulness, sometimes you may also experience long breath. When you breathe slowly. When you experience the long breath, then you only just trying to observe the long breath with mindfulness. Sometimes you may also experience the short breath. When you breathe quickly, then you only just trying to observe the short breath with mindfulness. Don't purposely make to be loud or to be short. You only just trying to observe the natural long and short breath with mindfulness. When you can carefully observe the long and short breath with mindfulness, then your mindfulness will become stronger than before. This one you will be able to stay with the breath, comfortably and peacefully for a long time. Mind observing the long and short breath with mindfulness, if you can concentrate on the breath, if you can sit for half an hour or one hour, comfortably and peacefully without 100 tons or with less tons, then you can continue to observe the whole body of the breath. The whole body of the breath means from beginning to end of the breath. You only just trying to observe the end breath from beginning to end of the breath. When you observe the out breath, you only just trying to observe from beginning to end of the breath without any 100 tons. When you experience the long breath, you just trying to observe from beginning to end of the long breath. When you experience the short breath, you only just trying to observe from beginning and to end the short breath. Then your mindfulness will become stronger. When your mindfulness becomes stronger, then you will be able to be aware of the whole body or the long breath and the whole body or the short breath with mindfulness. Then you will be able to meditate comfortably and peacefully for a long time. Then when you can stay with the breath for a long time, when you can meditate comfortably and peacefully for a long time, then the breath will automatically become soft. Then you are only just trying to observe the subtle breath with mindfulness. Even if you know the subtle breath with mindfulness, then your mindfulness is deeper than before, better than before, stronger than before. That's why your concentration also will be deeper than before. Then you will be able to meditate comfortably and peacefully for a long time. When you practice in this way again and again, day by day, then because of strong concentration, strong mindfulness, although you are sitting for 1 hour, 2 hours, 3 hours continuously, then you will not be tired. You can meditate comfortably and peacefully with a very light body. If you can sit in this way many sessions, many days, then because of your concentration, the sign of concentration appears. For example, if you are watching the breath, you may see a cloud around the nostril area, or this is the sign of concentration. When it appears, don't be patient, this sign is still, this nimetite. You are only just trying to continue to observe the breath. When you can deeply concentrate on the breath with mindfulness, then because of strong concentration, the sign will become whiter and whiter, or become very white, like cottonwood, etc. Then when it appears, you are only just trying to continue to observe the breath. Then after some time, because of strong concentration, this sign or this nimetite will become brighter and brighter. Finally, if you are watching the breath, your mind will automatically absorb into a bright nimetite. Then you can also stay with this bright nimetite. Even you will forget the whole environment, including your body. Then your concentration is very deep. At that time, although you are sitting for a long time, 3 hours or 4 hours, then you will not be tired. You will have a lot of joyful feelings. Finally, what happens? Then when you can stay with very bright nimetites for 2 hours or 3 hours, continuously, many times, many days, at the time, 5 genophytox will obviously appear. Then what are the 5 genophytox? We take an initial application of the mind on the body-body nimetite. We jarra sustained application of the mind on the body-body nimetite, P.T., like came for the body-body nimetite, Sukha, joyful feelings on the body-body nimetite, or happiness on the body-body nimetite. Eka gata, one point in the mind on the body-body nimetite, or these 5 genophytox become obvious. Or when you can stay with very bright nimetites for long times, many times, then, because of these 5 genophytox, then 5 hindrances will not appear. Before you reach this concentration state, sure you will experience a lot of hindrances. What are the hindrances? Sometimes, gamme chanda nivarna, the other designer or such designers will appear. Sometimes, Iwo biabada nivarna, headdress will appear in your mind. Sometimes, tina meida, sloth and top bath, trout zines will appear in your mind. Then, odaja gogo ja, restlessness and remorse will appear. Vijigai ja, doubt will appear in your mind. Because of these 5 hindrances, although you want to stay with meditation objects for a long time, deeply, comfortably and peacefully, you couldn't stay. But when you reach this concentration state, because of the power of concentration, because of the power of 5 genophytox, those 5 hindrances will not appear. Then, if you can maintain these concentrations for a long time, many times, many days, then actually you are in the jhana's observation concentration state. When you attain the first jhana, then you should continue. This is called the first jhana. When you can stay with the bright nivarna for a long time, many times, then you are in the first jhana state. When you are in the first jhana state, then you should continue to practice 5 mastery and the first jhana. What are the 5 masteries? Whenever you want to reflect on the 5 genophytox, you can easily reflect on those genophytox. Then, you can also enter into jhana within short times. For example, as soon as you close your eyes and pay attention to the breath, within short times, within 1 or 2 minutes, the bright nivarna will appear and you can absorb into the bright nivarna. Then you can enter into the first jhana within short times. You can also stay in jhana for a long time. Then another one, you can also determine the nivarna state in jhana for about 1 hour. Then according to your determinations, you can also stay in jhana for about 1 hour. In the same way, you determine to stay in jhana for 2 hours or 3 hours or more. According to your determinations, you can stay in jhana for a long time, 2 hours or 3 hours or more, etc. Then you can also determine where you emerge from jhana after about 1 hour. You can also emerge from jhana after about 1 hour. In the same way, you also determine to emerge from jhana after 2 hours or 3 hours, etc. Then you can also emerge from jhana exactly, not so much different. These are also kinds of mastery. When you can successfully practice these mastery, then you become an ammastar in the first jhana. When you become ammastar in the first jhana, then you can go to the scan jhana stage. How to go to the scan jhana stage? First, enter into the first jhana for about 1 hour. Imagine from the first jhana, then you reflect on the disadvantages of the first jhana and advantages of the scanned jhana. How to reflect? The first jhana is very close to 500's enemy. Then the first jhana has close jhana factors of vitaka and vijara, initial applications and sustained applications. The scanned jhana is more peaceful than the first jhana because there is no vitaka and vijara. With the intentions to remove vitaka and vijara to attain the scanned jhana, then concentrate on the bodipaga nimita. Then you will automatically reach the scanned jhana. Then when you have reached the scanned jhana, then you will find only 3 jhana factors in the scanned jhana, bt, sukha, ekeketa, no more vitaka and vijara. Or this is the scanned jhana. When you have attained the scanned jhana, then stay there, enter into this jhana for a long time. Then also practice the five mastery in the scanned jhana, like the first jhana. Then when you become a master in the scanned jhana, you can continue to practice the dachshana, the fourth jhana in the same way. Then by practicing this anapanat meditation, step-by-step systematically according to the bodhas' instructions, then you can attain up to the fourth jhana stage. Then when you are successful in anapanat meditation up to the fourth jhana stage, based on this anapanat meditation, then you can continue to practice the other meditation subjects, step-by-step systematically up to the realization of nipana. Thank you.