 One gazes upon one's meditation object and it could be a sunset or it could be the breath. And one relaxes deeply while maintaining one's attention upon the meditation object. One does not hyper focus on an object but gazes upon it with a soft gaze. One intends the mind to relax and become still and the body to relax, to become calm and the breath to become calm. All while one is meditating upon one's meditation object. While meditating diligently, pulling one's senses away from the physical senses or using one of the physical senses as a vehicle for meditation, such as the eyes while gazing upon a sunset, one attends to one's meditation object, relaxing the body, calming the mind. The first jhana is characterized by simply finding the practice of meditation pleasant, perhaps even blissful and joyful. When one finds meditation pleasant, a relief from the world, a refuge from the world, that is the first jhana. Now we savor that sweetness of relaxation while meditating upon our meditation object. We relax more deeply. Perhaps our body and our mind becomes joy filled because meditation is really such a great release. From the tensions and anxieties of life. And when we savor that sweetness, we relax deeply. Maybe 20 minutes goes by savoring that sweetness and we may find that our mind becomes still, calm and the body relaxed. If so, then you've arrived at the second jhana. The second jhana is characterized by tranquility, which is simply the stilling of the mind. So to become established in the second jhana, we savor that stillness of mind, that deep relaxation of the body. And we savor that as our meditation object, that sweet stillness of mind. For as long as we can comfortably sustain it, as long as we find it joyful, pleasant, perhaps even blissful. And as time goes by and the mind is quite still and the body is quite relaxed, then we lose a sense of self. The mind becomes even stiller, the body even more relaxed. Sounds can arise and it does not shake our mind. Nothing draws us away from our focus on the stillness of the mind. Oftentimes we begin to be filled with energy at this time as well. This is a deeper level of tranquility which is translated as equanimity because we cannot be shaken from our meditation object. There might even be a sudden noise like the slamming of a door and it will not shake us from our meditation object. It will not draw us away from this absorption, this ecstatic altered state of consciousness of the third jhana. And as we savor this deeper level of tranquility and stillness and calm and equanimity and the rising of energy, powerful energy in our body, we savor that for as long as the mind will allow us to. Then we relax even deeper and we enter into the fourth jhana. The fourth jhana is characterized by such a profound stillness of mind and a profound loss of self that we feel as though we can meditate forever. The mind is rock solid upon its meditation object. The body is filled with energy and the hours can go by as we savor this deeper level of bliss, deeper level of joy. We call this ecstasy. It is ecstasy to still the mind and to relax the body ever so deeply. All of our discomfort is lost and we are filled with powerful energy. This is the bliss of the fourth jhana. Hours can go by in this bliss if you let it. This is the bliss of the fourth jhana. Thank you.