 Using the sun as a meditation object, we sit facing the horizon. We relax, our spine is erect, and we intend our mind to become still. As we gaze upon the eastern horizon, as the sun is about to arise. Since the first jhana has characterized my pleasant internal subjective feelings, such as bliss and joy, then using something as a meditation object that infills or encourages blissful and joyful feelings is wise. Gazing upon the sunrise can fill many of us with joy. As our body and mind are saturated with feelings of bliss and joy, we use those feelings as our meditation object. And how we use those feelings as a meditation object is we save them. We feel everything the full extent of those sensations, every little nuance of those sensations. We do not have internal dialogue, we intend to have a mind still. Going into the wilderness aids our stilling of the mind, because there are few distractions, and it is very quiet out here. As we gaze upon the horizon, feeling joy as the sun rises, feeling bliss throughout our body. This is the first jhana. We save that first jhana. We do not look for anything else, because it is fulfilling that it is joyful, that it is blissful. Gazing upon the horizon and filled with bliss and joy. We have entered the first jhana. And we are filled with joy. We are filled with bliss. Yes, we are filled to overflowing. Let's bless and joy. It is nothing more blissful and joyful other than going deeper into absorption, deeper into the ecstasy. Using the rising sun as a meditation object is like having the sun rise in your heart every day. The heart is filled with bliss and love and joy and compassion. You are not distracted by any sound, you are not distracted by any thought. You just gaze upon the horizon, relaxing deeply, intending the mind to be still, allowing the sun to rise in your heart. Gazing upon the horizon, looking erect upon the horizon. Gazing upon the horizon, looking erect upon seated comfortably. Using the rising sun as your meditation object, you allow the body to relax the mind to be still. A beautiful scene, a field, joy, bliss, love, compassion in your heart. Your attachments for the world fall away. There is nothing more beautiful than doing the sun rise. Thank you for watching.