 Alright kids, this is the fire casino, aka candle flame meditation. This one's sweet. The purpose of staring at a candle flame is to gain concentration, simultaneously learning how to relax the body. If you can do this, you can get to what the Buddhists call access concentration, where your concentration is so narrow in focus that if you steer it and turn it to a pleasant body sensation, that sensation will fill your entire awareness and you will go into a state called the first jhana, which basically feels to me like going over the edge of a roller coaster and then just for as long as you want until your mind gets bored of doing it. You should try to get to the first jhana early in your meditation career so that you have enough concentration to do real insight practices. You know if you know that you can always just sit down and get to something like that in terms of how you feel, then you're not going to go out chasing that feeling by having sex or drinking alcohol or doing drugs or being stupid. So I recommend staring at a candle flame. The other way to do it is with your breath. At the end of the video, whether you've gotten access concentration or not, don't worry about it because we'll do something fun. We'll actually project ourselves and it'll be kind of cool. Begin by relaxing the body. Sink into your seat. Just close your eyes. Slow down your breathing. Just take a moment to let go of all your stress. Relax your toes. Feel the tingling in your feet, your ankles. Just relax your body. Relax your feet. Scan up your legs, hips. Check your breathing again. Breathe into your lower belly instead of the top of your chest. Make sure your back is that stacked quarters, balanced. Drop everything down onto that stack of quarters. Relax down your arms, fingers, and neck. Let your jaw drop. Soften your eyes and forehead. Do one more body scan now from your feet. Flowing up your legs, hips, belly, chest, neck, jaw, eyes, out your head. Now open your eyes and observe the candle flame. Look at the colors. Look at the wick and the candle itself. Pay attention to the details that you're seeing. Note as many as you can. Look at how the candle flame is moving. Can you feel its heat on your face? Don't think about anything or analyze anything. Just take in what you're seeing. The more details you can think of that you can see, and remember, the better you'll be able to do this next step. Now close your eyes and recreate what you saw in your imagination through the mind's eye. Put as many details into your visual image as you can remember. Colors, shapes, the motion of the flame. Open your eyes again. Look at the flame again. This time take in even more details. When you close your eyes again, you'll be able to visualize with even more detail. One thing you can do is set your mind so that it's like a cat guarding a mouse hole. As soon as that flame moves, you're going to pounce. What's it going to do next? What about next? What about next? Every detail that you notice that you didn't before is a mouse sticking its head up. You can pounce on it. Close your eyes again. Create an even more detailed candle. If you find your mind has wandered, look at what it has wandered into for a moment until it evaporates and you can bring your mind back gently to the candle and your vision. Don't worry about it. Try to remember that focusing for 10 seconds solidly without any interruption will do you far more good than being generally with the meditation on and off for a full hour. Like that cat guarding a mouse hole. Once more, go ahead and open your eyes and stalk that candle again. Every detail you notice, motion, texture, color, shapes. Does the flame have a reflection in the candle wax? Does the wick have a glowing tip? Does the candle wick have braids? Are there tiny voids at the bottom of the pool of wax? Is that blue at the bottom of the flame or violet? What color is that? Is there another reflection of that flame behind it? Close your eyes once more. Recreate that candle. Be sure to stay relaxed. Focus on concentration and relaxation together. Focus on some body. At this point, if you are feeling any tingling in your face or rising energy in the body, you are at access concentration. Try giving yourself a half smile, kind of like smiling at a newborn baby that you just met. Drop your awareness from the vision to the smile itself. Pleasant sensation. Focus there now. Relaxation. Focus. Pleasant smile. Feel if there is any energy rising up your belly, face, head. It may be fleeting or it may swoop you into an altered state right now. If not, that's okay. We are going to do something fun anyway. If you have reached Jhana, you are gone. You are on your own. If not, open your eyes one last time and really get a good last look at that candle flame. We are going to try something now. See how it bounces. It's motion. It's form, shape, color, transitions, flowing energy inside the flame. Now close your eyes one last time and recreate that candle. It should be pretty clear at this point. What we are going to be doing now is we are going to be using the imagination to explore the candle. So imagine yourself as being a small speck of dust. And you are able to roam free around this room and fly. Go up to the candle. Ride up to it and explore it with all five senses. What can you see? Can you hear the flame roaring in your ears as you get close? Can you smell the wax and the smoke? Can you feel the heat from the flame? Can you reach down and touch the wax? What does it feel like on your fingers? Reach out your hand and wipe it through the flame. What does it do? Using all the details from your vision, move around the candle all the way around it and explore it. If you'd like to, you can go inside the flame itself. The heat is very intense but it doesn't hurt you. What do you see in there? Go up to the tip of the candle flame and stick your head out the tip so your body is engulfed in flame and energy that you can see around the room. You can see the flame. You can see the flame. It's a piece of paper. It's a piece of paper. It's a piece of paper. When you're ready, just open your eyes and bring this fire casino practice to an end. My first big insight break came by looking at a candle flame. My eyes would blur while I was looking at it and I would try to force my mind to refocus. That was causing all kinds of effort and pain. I could see Duka. I thought I'll just allow it to blur. I know the Four Noble Truths. I let go. I did. My mind blurred. After a few seconds, my mind got bored of blurring and it refocused itself. It didn't take any longer than when I forced it back with all my willpower. I saw this insight into impermanence. That blurred state was nothing. It was going to arise. It was going to be there and it was going to pass away. When I made a self that needed to refocus, set that goal to refocus, when I grasped that, that was causing the Duka. All three characteristics of Four Noble Truths right there in the candle flame. Fire Casinas.